# pypaftol: Home of `paftools`

This repository contains the `paftools` Python module which provides functionality for recovery and data analysis of target capture data in the [PAFTOL Project]([https://www.kew.org/science/our-science/projects/plant-and-fungal-trees-of-life). Some of this functionality will be applicable and hopefully found to be useful beyond PAFTOL, e.g. for processing HybSeq data in general. Functionality can be accessed either via the `paftools` script or the Python API.

The documentation provided here is intended to help beta-testers with getting started.

## Usage

Description and examples of usage are provided in our [usage](paftools_usage.md) and [tutorial](paftools_tutorial.md) readme.


## Prerequisites

Building and installing the `paftol` module requires

* Python 2.7.x (Python 3.x is currently not supported)
* Python 2.7.x development package (`libpython-all-dev`)
* BioPython 1.66 (newer versions are likely to work as well)  (`python-biopython`, and also `python-biopython-sql`)
* setuptools (`python-setuptools`)
* epydoc (`python-epydoc`)
* GNU C compiler (`gcc`) and associated tools
* GNU make

The following bioinformatics applications and suites are required for full functionality of the module and the `paftools` script:

* Trimmomatic - to use Trimmomatic via Paftools a little shell script is required called ```trimmomatic``` that needs to be available from the command line
```
#! /bin/bash
args=$@
java -jar <FULL_PATH_TO>/trimmomatic-0.39.jar ${args[@]}
```
* blast
* spades
* samtools
* bwa
* exonerate
* mafft
* clustalo (aka clustal-omega)
* emboss
* embassy-phylip
* fastqc (currently exactly version 0.11.5 is required)

Additional prerequisites for PAFTOL internal use include:

* Python `mysql.connector`  <!--Paul B. - changed from mysqlc.connector -->

These prerequisites should generally be provided on the cluster.


## Installation Guide

1. Clone the repository
```shell
git clone https://github.com/RBGKew/pypaftol
```

2. Install by running the command
```
make hinstall
```
This will install the package in `$HOME/lib/python`, which is the standard directory for installing Python modules for use in your
account only. You'll need to ensure that your `PYTHONPATH` environment variable includes this directory, see Tips section below.

3. Check that the installation was successful by running
```
paftools -h
```
This should give you a help message listing the `paftools` subcommands
currently available.

4. If you like a HTML version of the APIs provided by the `paftools` package
and its subpackages, run the command
```
make doc
```

At the time of writing this `README`, this installation process works on the cluster. Sharing any feedback is very welcome, of course.

Additional information about installation are available [here][Advanced_Install.md]

## Tips

### Setting up `PYTHONPATH`

`PYTHONPATH` is an environment variable which the Python interpreter uses to obtain a list of directories to search for modules when
executing an `import` statement. By default, this variable won't include any directories in your login directory, so if you want to
install any modules in your personal space, you'll need to add the directory where you install modules for your personal use. This can be
done by the following snippet of bash code:

```
if test -z "$PYTHONPATH" ; then
  PYTHONPATH=${HOME}/lib/python
else
  PYTHONPATH="${HOME}/lib/python:${PYTHONPATH}"
fi
export PYTHONPATH
```

* identify the (mandatory) parameters and options required by `foo`
* write a function `addFooParser` that takes an argparse parser as an argument and adds the relevant parameters and options to that
* write a `runFoo` function that takes a single `argNamespace` parameter, containing the argument namespace generated by the parser, and uses the attributes in that namespace to execute the command
* finally, wire everything up by calling `addFooParser` in `paftoolsMain` and by calling `p.add_default(func=runFoo)` on the subparser
